# Creating a StreamDevice IOC

In this tutorial,
you’re going to learn how to create an EPICS IOC with EPNix
that communicates with a power supply,
using the [StreamDevice] support module.

## Pre-requisites

Verify that you have all pre-requisites installed.
If not,
follow the {doc}`./pre-requisites` section.

## Running the power supply simulator

EPNix has a power supply simulator
for you to test your IOC.

To run it:

```bash
nix run 'github:epics-extensions/epnix#psu-simulator'
```

For the rest of the tutorial,
leave it running in a separate terminal.

## Creating your top

Use these commands to create an EPNix top:

```bash
# Initialise an EPNix top
nix flake new -t 'github:epics-extensions/epnix' my-top
cd my-top

# Enter the EPNix development shell, that has EPICS base installed in it.
nix develop

# Create your app and ioc boot folder
makeBaseApp.pl -t ioc example
makeBaseApp.pl -i -t ioc -p example -a linux-x86_64 Example

# Create a git repository, and make sure all files are tracked
git init
git add .
```

After that,
you can already check that your top build with:

```bash
nix build -L
```

This `nix build` command compiles your IOC,
and all its dependencies.
This makes the usual EPICS environment setup unneeded.

If found in the official Nix cache server,
Nix downloads packages from there
instead of compiling them.

This command puts a `./result` symbolic link in your current directory,
containing the compilation result.

:::{tip}
If you want an explanation
of the files generated by the template,
read {doc}`../explanations/template-files`.
:::

## Adding StreamDevice to the EPNix environment

Adding dependencies to the EPNix environment happens inside the {file}`ioc.nix` file.

For adding StreamDevice,
change yours like so:

```{code-block} diff
:caption: {file}`flake.nix`

   # EPICS support modules can be only in propagatedBuildInputs
   # --
   propagatedBuildInputs = [
-    #epnix.support.StreamDevice
+    epnix.support.StreamDevice
   ];
```

Then,
leave your EPNix development shell by running `exit`,
and re-enter it with `nix develop`.
Then,
run `epicsConfigurePhase`.

By modifying the dependencies of your package,
your build environment changed:
before the change,
the build environment didn't have StreamDevice installed.
With this change,
StreamDevice must be available to build your EPICS top.

Separate from having StreamDevice in the build environment,
the EPICS build system must know where to find it.
EPICS uses the {file}`configure/RELEASE` and {file}`configure/RELEASE.local` files
to find EPICS-specific dependencies,
often called "EPICS support modules".

During the "configure" phase,
EPNix automatically generates the {file}`configure/RELEASE.local` file,
which is why you have to run `epicsConfigurePhase`.

With this,
your development shell has StreamDevice available,
the EPICS build system can find StreamDevice
by reading the {file}`configure/RELEASE.local` file.

:::{tip}
As a rule,
each time you edit the {file}`ioc.nix` file,
leave and re-enter your development shell (`exit` then `nix develop`),
and run `epicsConfigurePhase`.
:::

## Adding StreamDevice to your EPICS app

To add StreamDevice to your app,
make the following modifications:

Change the `exampleApp/src/Makefile`
so that your App knows the record types of StreamDevice and its dependencies.
Also change that file so that it links to the StreamDevice library and its dependencies,
during compilation.

```{code-block} makefile
:caption: {file}`exampleApp/src/Makefile`

# ...

# Include dbd files from all support applications:
example_DBD += calc.dbd
example_DBD += asyn.dbd
example_DBD += stream.dbd
example_DBD += drvAsynIPPort.dbd

# Add all the support libraries needed by this IOC
example_LIBS += calc
example_LIBS += asyn
example_LIBS += stream

# ...
```

Create the `exampleApp/Db/example.proto` file
that has the definition of the protocol.
This file tells StreamDevice what to send the power supply,
and what to expect in return.

```{code-block} perl
:caption: {file}`exampleApp/Db/example.proto`

Terminator = LF;

getVoltage {
    out ":volt?"; in "%f";
}

setVoltage {
    out ":volt %f";
    @init { getVoltage; }
}
```

Create the `exampleApp/Db/example.db` file.
That file specifies the name, type, and properties of the Process Variables (PV)
that EPICS exposes over the network.
It also specifies how they relate to the functions written in the protocol file.

```{code-block} bash
:caption: {file}`exampleApp/Db/example.db`

record(ai, "${PREFIX}VOLT-RB") {
    field(DTYP, "stream")
    field(INP, "@example.proto getVoltage ${PORT}")
}

record(ao, "${PREFIX}VOLT") {
    field(DTYP, "stream")
    field(OUT, "@example.proto setVoltage ${PORT}")
    field(FLNK, "${PREFIX}VOLT-RB")
}
```

Change `exampleApp/Db/Makefile`
so that the EPICS build system installs `example.proto` and `example.db`:

```{code-block} makefile
:caption: {file}`exampleApp/Db/Makefile`

# ...

#----------------------------------------------------
# Create and install (or just install) into <top>/db
# databases, templates, substitutions like this
DB += example.db
DB += example.proto

# ...
```

Change your `st.cmd` file
so that it knows where to load the protocol file,
and how to connect to the remote power supply.

```{code-block} csh
:caption: {file}`iocBoot/iocExample/st.cmd`

#!../../bin/linux-x86_64/example

< envPaths

## Register all support components
dbLoadDatabase("${TOP}/dbd/example.dbd")
example_registerRecordDeviceDriver(pdbbase)

# Where to find the protocol files
epicsEnvSet("STREAM_PROTOCOL_PATH", "${TOP}/db")
# The TCP/IP address of the power supply
drvAsynIPPortConfigure("PS1", "localhost:9999")

## Load record instances
dbLoadRecords("${TOP}/db/example.db", "PREFIX=, PORT=PS1")

iocInit()
```

Run `chmod +x iocBoot/iocExample/st.cmd`
so that you can run your command file as-is.

You can test that your top builds by running:

```bash
nix build -L
```

You will see that your IOC does not build.
This is because we haven’t told Git to track those newly added files,
and so Nix ignores them too.

Run `git add .` for Git and Nix to track all files,
and try a `nix build -L` again.

If everything goes right,
you can examine your compiled top under `./result`.

You can observe that the EPICS build system:

- installs the `example` app {file}`bin/linux-x86_64`,
  and links to the correct libraries
- installs {file}`example.proto` and {file}`example.db` under {file}`db/`
- generates {file}`example.dbd` and installs it under {file}`dbd/`

## Running your IOC

To run your IOC,
build it first with `nix build -L`,
and change directory into the `./result/iocBoot/iocExample` folder.
Then, run:

```bash
./st.cmd
```

You should see the IOC starting and connecting to `localhost:9999`.

:::{tip}
{file}`./result` is a symbolic link,
so if you made any changes to your IOC and re-ran `nix build`,
a terminal window already in {file}`./result/iocBoot/iocExample` would still point to the old version.

To run the new version,
either re-open a new window
and `cd` into the new {file}`./result/`,
or in the old location,
you can run:

```console
user@machine .../result/iocBoot/iocExample $ cd .
```

For quickly re-running an IOC,
you can use this command:

```console
user@machine .../result/iocBoot/iocExample $ cd . ; ./st.cmd
```
:::

## Recompiling with make

Using `nix build` to compile your IOC each time might feel slow.
This is because Nix re-compiles your IOC from scratch each time.

If you want a more "traditional" edit / compile / run workflow,
you can place yourself in the development shell with `nix develop`,
and use `make` from here.

Make sure to exit and re-enter the development shell
each time you edit Nix files,
and re-run `epicsConfigurePhase`.

## Next steps

More commands are available in the power supply simulator.
To view them,
close your IOC,
and open a direct connection to the simulator:

```bash
nc localhost 9999
# or
telnet localhost 9999
```

You can install the `nc` command through the `netcat` package,
or you can install the `telnet` command through the `telnet` package,

Either command opens a prompt
where you can type `help` then press enter
to view the available commands.

Try to edit the protocol file and the database file
to add those features to your IOC.

For more information about how to write the StreamDevice protocol,
examine the [Protocol Files] documentation.

You might also want to read {doc}`../user-guides/flake-registry`.

## Pitfalls

Although EPNix tries to be close to a standard EPICS development,
some differences might lead to confusion.
You can find more information about this in the {doc}`../faq`.

[protocol files]: https://paulscherrerinstitute.github.io/StreamDevice/protocol.html
[streamdevice]: https://paulscherrerinstitute.github.io/StreamDevice/
