# 25.05 Release notes

```{default-domain} nix
```

## New features and highlights

- New module {option}`services.iocs`
  to deploy EPICS IOCs as systemd services.

  If you deployed EPICS IOCs manually by using `systemd.services`,
  or used the configuration {samp}`epnix.nixos.services.{ioc}.config`
  generated from the now deprecated IOC module system,
  read the {doc}`../nixos-services/user-guides/ioc-services` NixOS guide.

- New module {option}`environment.epics`
  to configure EPICS parameters.

  This enables configuring the EPICS CA address list,
  in a single location,
  for every EPNix module,
  such as IOCs, Archiver Appliance, Phoebus services, etc.

  Read the {doc}`../nixos-services/user-guides/epics-environment` NixOS guide
  for more information.

- A new set of options in {option}`programs.phoebus-client`
  enables you to configure the {file}`settings.ini` of your Phoebus
  directly using Nix options,
  including colors and fonts.
  Read the {doc}`../nixos-services/user-guides/phoebus-client` NixOS guide
  for more information.

- A multi-language formatter is now included
  in the new EPICS top template.
  Run `nix fmt` in your IOC
  to format your project with the same coding conventions as EPNix.

  To use it in existing EPICS top projects,
  add `inherit (epnix) formatter;`
  in the same block as `overlays.default = ...;`,
  and add a {file}`.clang-format` file containing `BasedOnStyle: WebKit`.

- Archiver Appliance was upgrade from 1.1.0 -> 2.0.5,
  see the [Archiver Appliance 2.0.5 release notes].
  None of the breaking change should affect users of the
  {option}`services.archiver-appliance` NixOS options.

## Breaking changes

- The old way of developing IOCs was deprecated,
  and will be removed in version `nixos-26.05`.
  Please follow the migration guide {doc}`../ioc/user-guides/deprecations/migrating-from-modules-development`.

### Phoebus

Phoebus was upgraded from 4.7.x to 5.0.x,
which contains breaking changes:

- The Phoebus client settings are now not persisted on disk.
  This means that for custom settings,
  either:

  - you must always start Phoebus with the `-settings /path/to/settings.ini` option,
  - or you must configure the `settings.ini` file using the {doc}`Phoebus client NixOS module <../nixos-services/user-guides/phoebus-client>`,
  - or you must place the `settings.ini` file in a default location.
    See the [Phoebus Preference Settings] documentation for more information.

- Phoebus save-and-restore now requires authentication
  for all non read-only operations.
  This means that the new option {nix:option}`services.phoebus-save-and-restore.settings."auth.impl"`
  is now required.
  Examine the updated guide {doc}`../nixos-services/user-guides/phoebus-save-and-restore`
  for how to use it.

## Documentation

- A revised sidebar,
  with common parts at the top,
  and sections that only apply to different user profiles
- A revised introduction,
  and an explanation of {doc}`../advantages-disadvantages`,
  to better explain the project to newcomers
- New {doc}`../cheatsheet`,
  with links to often used commands and documentation,
  also available in PDF

## EPNix development

- The documentation was converted from RST to Markdown
  to make it easier to contribute to

- The default formatter for Nix code changed
  from Alejandra to Nixfmt (RFC style).
  If you had pending Pull Requests
  and rebasing them leads to merge conflicts,
  you can use the [Mergiraf] tool to help resolving those conflicts,
  then run `nix fmt` again.

- Other languages are now formatted when running `nix fmt`
  in the EPNix repository,
  including Bash, C/C++, and Python

[archiver appliance 2.0.5 release notes]: https://github.com/archiver-appliance/epicsarchiverap/releases/tag/2.0.5
[Phoebus Preference Settings]: https://control-system-studio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/preferences.html
[Mergiraf]: https://mergiraf.org/
