# 26.05 Release notes (unreleased)

```{default-domain} nix
```

## Breaking changes

- This release removes the "IOC modules" system for packaging EPICS IOCs,
  which was deprecated in EPNix 25.05.
  If you still used this old way of packaging IOCs,
  follow the migration guide {doc}`../ioc/user-guides/deprecations/migrating-from-modules-development`.

- The {option}`services.phoebus-alarm-server` and {option}`services.phoebus-alarm-logger` NixOS modules were heavily hardened,
  because the Alarm Server might run arbitrary commands from the network,
  often without any authentication.

  See the {ref}`Phoebus alarm danger indication <phoebus-alarm-danger>`
  for a more in-depth explanation.

- The PVWS part of the {option}`services.dbwr` NixOS module was split
  into its own module {option}`services.pvws`.

  If you set any of the settings
  `EPICS_CA_ADDR_LIST`,
  `EPICS_CA_AUTO_ADDR_LIST`,
  `PV_DEFAULT_TYPE`,
  or `PV_WRITE_SUPPORT`
  from {option}`services.dbwr.settings`,
  define them in {option}`services.pvws.settings` instead.

## New features and highlights

- {pkg}`epnix.channel-finder-service` was upgraded to `5.0.0+`
  and {pkg}`epnix.support.reccaster` / {pkg}`python3Packages.recceiver` were upgraded to `1.9.2+`.
  No user-visible breaking changes.

- {pkg}`epnix.phoebus` now bundles the Phoebus documentation,
  and follows a file structure closer to what's distributed in official Phoebus packages.

- {option}`services.pvws` can now be configured independently of DBWR.

- {pkg}`epnix.dbwr` was upgraded to `R1`.

## Fixes

- spring-boot based services
  (ChannelFinder, Phoebus Olog, Phoebus save-and-restore)
  now won't start an Embedded LDAP server
  unless the Embedded LDAP is explicitly used.
  This solves a port conflict when installing those services
  on the same machine.

  This fix was backported to the `nixos-25.11` branch.

## Documentation

- The {doc}`../ioc/user-guides/testing/python-scripts` article was rewritten
  and is now much simpler.

- The {doc}`../nixos-services/user-guides/phoebus-alarm` guide now has a section
  on how to add custom alarm scripts.
